He wasn’t the most extraordinary
among the apostles.
For example, he didn’t walk on water.
He didn’t receive “the keys of the Kingdom.”
He wasn’t one of the “Sons of Thunder.”
He didn’t see the transfiguration.
He didn’t write a Bible book.
In fact, all together
he’s only mentioned 12 times
in the Scriptures,
and that’s mostly
when the list of all the apostles is given.
Who are we talking about?
That would be Andrew.
See,
Andrew was best known
as the brother of Peter.
That’s what he was famous for primarily.
Peter is mentioned
some 150 times in the Scriptures.
And it seems that Peter
was always in the limelight,
whereas Andrew
always seemed to be in the shadows.
Peter was extraordinary;
Andrew was ordinary.
Like Andrew,
most of us view ourselves
as just ordinary.
We’re not the valedictorian.
We’re not the greatest speaker.
We’re not “Miss Congeniality.”
We’re just in the shadows.
But is that how Jehovah sees us?
Is that how he saw Andrew?
Let’s look at Andrew the person
for just a minute.
Open your Bibles, if you would,
to John chapter 1, please,
John chapter 1.
And if you begin just following
along with me in verse 35,
we see that Andrew
was a disciple of John the Baptizer.
And one day
when he was with John the Baptizer
and John said:
“See, the Lamb of God!”
what is it that Andrew did immediately?
He immediately left following John
to follow Jesus.
Now, we don’t have a lot of time
for this talk,
but what is it—?
What did Jehovah see in Andrew at that point?
He must have seen
that Andrew wanted to draw close to God
and that he would be adaptable
and that he would be willing to change
in order to be able to draw closer to Jehovah
and do his will.
Jehovah must have loved Andrew
for that attitude.
If you follow along in verses 38 and 39,
notice that it says:
‘Then Jesus turned,
and saw them following him.’
And do you notice what Jesus said?
He said:
“What are you looking for?”
Now, how did Andrew respond to that?
Did Andrew say:
‘Well, you know, Lord,
‘I’d like to have a better assignment,
‘something that brings a little prestige,
maybe some accolades.
‘And along with that,
if I had a bigger room,
one with a view . . . ’?
But he didn’t.
What he said was:
‘Lord, where are you staying?’
And the Bible shows us
that Andrew then went with Jesus
and stayed with him
till about four o’clock in the afternoon.
Now, that was interesting
because he was really showing
that he valued spiritual things
over the mundane things.
But then after that time,
verses 40 and 41 say
that Andrew ran to find his brother Peter.
And he said five words
—five words
that would change their lives forever:
“We have found the Messiah.”
Now, how did Andrew know that?
Well, Andrew must have been
a man who loved God’s Word.
He must have been familiar with it.
And so in that time that he was with Jesus,
he could take
what he’d read in the Scriptures
and compare them
with the man in front of him,
and he came to that conclusion.
He was a spiritual man.
He loved God’s Word.
And as a result of his zeal,
he brought his brother Peter to Jesus.
Well, now, that’s a little bit
about what we know about Andrew the person.
What about Andrew the apostle?
Well, let’s go over to John chapter 6 now,
John chapter 6,
and we’ll look at verses 40 and 41.
Oh, excuse me, John 6:5-9,
and here we see a large crowd of people now
that are gathering to see Jesus,
and Jesus wants to feed them.
You remember the account.
And so he says to Philip:
‘You know, I want to feed these people.’
Philip says:
‘Lord, that’s impossible.
Two hundred denarii wouldn’t feed them all.’
So there were probably
over 5,000 people there.
But now, while he, Philip,
is talking to Jesus,
trying to reason with him,
what is Andrew doing?
Andrew goes through the crowd,
he finds a little boy that has
some fish and some bread,
and he brings that little child to Jesus.
Now, did Andrew have any idea
what Jesus was going to do?
He couldn’t have known.
There’s no way he could have known.
But he must have thought—
He must have seen enough
to know that Jesus could do something,
and, of course, he did.
But what was the lesson?
Well, while Philip saw the problem,
Andrew was looking for a solution.
And you may notice again that as usual
Andrew is bringing people to Jesus.
Just as a side point,
what do you think
that little boy would be talking about
when he became my age,
yeah, after that miracle he saw?
It must have really been an impactful one.
Now, let’s go to John chapter 12,
John chapter 12,
and look down at verses 20 through 22
because now we have a group of Greeks
who come to worship at the festival.
And they approach Philip,
and what do they want to do?
They want to see Jesus.
What does Philip do?
Philip goes to Andrew.
What does Andrew do?
Andrew takes Philip,
and they go to Jesus.
Now, two things.
Number one:
Andrew recognized the channel.
He didn’t try to circumvent it.
He didn’t try to make the decision.
He recognized the channel.
And second,
Andrew was a friend
because now he would be a mentor to Philip
and teach him to go to the channel as well.
Well, the Bible doesn’t say much
about Andrew,
but we can see that Andrew
didn’t think it was all about him.
He always had the desire to help others.
So in this brief discussion,
is there anything really ordinary
about Andrew?
Not in Jehovah’s eyes.
So while it’s true
that Andrew never walked on water,
he never wrote a Bible book,
he also never denied Christ,
he never got his mom
to ask for special favors,
he was never known
for being a “doubting Andrew,”
and he never ever was called Satan,
he was a force for good
for those around him.
Now, the lessons for the class:
Be adaptable.
Be adaptable to the leanings
of Jehovah’s organization,
even if you don’t fully understand them.
Number two:
Don’t get tripped up by the desire
for the mundane things.
Remember the question
that Jesus asked Andrew:
“What are you looking for?”
That’s a good reset question for all of us
from time to time.
What are we looking for?
Number three:
Remember that Jehovah is not limited
in how he can work out problems.
Give him the chance to show
what he can do for you,
and you may find the answer comes
in some very unexpected ways.
And finally, in your assignment,
don’t be quick to pass over
the seemingly ordinary people.
Look for the “Andrews.”
They’re in all the congregations.
They’re in all the Bethels.
They’re like the hidden gems
that are all around us.
Acknowledge them;
encourage them;
see what they’re contributing,
and say something about it.
And those hidden gems
will begin to come out of the shadows,
and they will shine
in the light of appreciation.
So in the days to come,
be a steadying force for good.
Show loving kindness to all.
Give Jehovah your best,
and give the friends your best,
and give it with love.
And you will never ever be in the shadow
in Jehovah’s eyes.